[docs] contributing.rst: Documents evmone.so loading search paths. (#11613)
ethereum/solidity: docs/contributing.rst

Prerequisites
-------------

For running all compiler tests you should have
`evmone <https://github.com/ethereum/evmone/releases>`_,
`libz3 <https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3>`_ and

> `libhera <https://github.com/ewasm/hera>`_ locally installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`libhera <https://github.com/ewasm/hera>`_ installed locally.
```

> The libraries should end with the file name extension ``.so`` on Linux, ``.dll``

Reviewer 2: I think this is fine to move down where we also explain where to get them. I mean is this information relevant at all? Do you need to change the extension in some cases?

Author: I think in that case we can eliminate the Prerequisites part entirely? And just prepend the `brew install coreutils` paragraph to the next one?

Reviewer 2: We could briefly mention what is required and what is optional or at least that there are optional components.

Author: moved

> on Windows systems and `.dylib` on macOS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The libraries should end with the file name extension ``.so`` on Linux, ``.dll``
on Windows systems and ``.dylib`` on macOS.
```

Prerequisites
-------------

For running the compiler tests you should have the following dependencies available:

- `evmone <https://github.com/ethereum/evmone/releases>`_
- `libz3 <https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3>`_
- `libhera <https://github.com/ewasm/hera>`_

> The test script tries to discover the location of the above libraries,

Reviewer 2: This is kind of duplicated below.

Author: The upper part lists the deps and where to fetch them from and the lower one how they're looked up.

Reviewer 2: Still, there is duplication and I find it really confusing because I would wonder where to get all this stuff from.

Author: I've rephrased the first sentence and also removed the listing.

in the project top level. The required file is called ``libevmone.so`` on Linux
systems, ``evmone.dll`` on Windows systems and ``libevmone.dylib`` on macOS.

> The dependent libraries (such as ``evmone.so`` / ``evmone.dll``) will be loaded

Reviewer: I just noticed that the paragraph above already mentions the location of `evmone`. I think we should update it too. I'd merge them both into something like this:
```
The test script tries to discover the location of the ``evmone`` library, which can be located
in the current directory, installed on the system level or in ``deps/libs`` subdirectory located
in the current directory or up to two levels up from it. You also can use the `$ETH_EVMONE`
environment variable to specify a custom location.
```

> automatically if they are placed in the directory behind the environment variable ``$ETH_EVMONE``,

Reviewer: "Behind" sounds a bit weird to me when referring to a variable. How about this?
```suggestion
automatically if they are placed in the directory specified in the environment variable ``$ETH_EVMONE``,
```

> automatically if they are placed in the directory behind the environment variable ``$ETH_EVMONE``,

Reviewer: We apparently have the same exact system for `$ETH_HERA`/`libhera.so`. Perhaps we should mention it too? I'm not sure if hera is really required though - I do not have it installed and I do not get test failures so I'm not sure if it's actually hooked up into the test system.

Reviewer: But have you checked if it's actually required? I mentioned it in case it is but I haven't really checked myself.

> ``deps``, or ``deps/lib`` relative to the current working directory and three levels up.

Reviewer: It's actually two levels up.

On macOS some of the testing scripts expect GNU coreutils to be installed.
This can be easiest accomplished using Homebrew: ``brew install coreutils``.

Search paths

> ------------

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be one level lower?

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's best to just extend the first paragraph a little that already explains where the library is looked for?

Author: I firsth thought about exactly that. will change it.

> The dependent libraries (such as ``evmone.so`` / ``evmone.dll``) can be
> located in different locations to be found automatically.
> 
> The paths that are looked up in order are:

Reviewer: How about this?
```suggestion
The dependent libraries (such as ``evmone.so`` / ``evmone.dll``) will be loaded
automatically if they are placed in one of the following locations:
```

- ``$ETH_EVMONE``

> - ``$PROJECT_ROOT/deps``

Reviewer 2: Are you sure it is `PROJECT_ROOT` and not cwd?

Reviewer: Yeah, it's CWD.

Author: oh then CWD is a bad pick, it should be changed, shouldn't it? I think depending on CWD may be bad (Don't want to bring up security concerns on this area though).

Reviewer: True. I think this should depend on the location of the binary, not CWD.

Reviewer: I have created an issue: #11614.

Author: I've actually picked #11614 up, and will resume changing the text here once after that one. @cameel

Reviewer: It's not certain if we're actually going to change that so for the time being please just update the doc to mention working dir instead of `$PROJECT_ROOT`, because that's what it uses now.

- ``$PROJECT_ROOT/deps/lib``
- ``$PROJECT_ROOT/../deps``
- ``$PROJECT_ROOT/../deps/lib``

> - ``$PROJECT_ROOT/../../deps/lib``
> - ``$PROJECT_ROOT/../../deps/lib``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``$PROJECT_ROOT/../../deps``
- ``$PROJECT_ROOT/../../deps/lib``
```

> - ``$PROJECT_ROOT/../../../deps/lib``

Reviewer: It will also try CWD.
Also, if the library is not found in any of these, we still let the system look up the dynamic library in the standard global locations. This might be worth mentioning too.

> Whereas ``$ETH_EVMONE`` is a user-supplied environment variable and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where ``$ETH_EVMONE`` is a user-supplied environment variable and
```

application ``soltest`` (or its wrapper ``scripts/soltest.sh``), as well as command line tests and
compilation tests.

The test system automatically tries to discover the location of the ``evmone`` library
starting from the current directory. The required file is called ``libevmone.so`` on Linux systems,
``evmone.dll`` on Windows systems and ``libevmone.dylib`` on macOS. If it is not found, tests that

> use it are skipped. These tests are ``libsolididty/semanticTests``, ``libsolidity/GasCosts``,

Reviewer 2: Wasn't the idea behind this pr that we explain in more detail where libevmone.so needs to be placed instead of removing this information?

Author: Maybe a misunderstanding on my side. In one of the comments above it did read like I was saying too much in the text. I see how I can extend this without saying too much.

Author: Updated.

application ``soltest`` (or its wrapper ``scripts/soltest.sh``), as well as command line tests and
compilation tests.

The test system automatically tries to discover the location of
the `evmone <https://github.com/ethereum/evmone/releases>`_ for running the semantic tests.

The ``evmone`` library must be located in the ``deps`` or ``deps/lib`` directory relative to the

> current working directory or up to the project root. Alternatively an explicit location

Reviewer: I think that project root is not checked. I already mentioned it in https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/pull/11613#discussion_r669904121.
```suggestion
current working directory, to its parent or to its parent's parent. Alternatively an explicit location
```

to the ``evmone`` shared object can be specified via the ``ETH_EVMONE`` environment variable.

> If running semantic tests is not required, the command line

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If ``evmone`` is not available or running semantic tests is not required, the command line
```

parameter ``--no-semantic-tests`` must be passed to ``./scripts/soltest.sh``.

The tests that use ``evmone`` are ``libsolidity/semanticTests``, ``libsolidity/GasCosts``,
``libsolidity/SolidityEndToEndTest``.

Running Ewasm tests is disabled by default and can be explicitly enabled
via ``./scripts/soltest.sh --ewasm`` and requires `hera <https://github.com/ewasm/hera>`_
to be found by ``soltest``.

> The ``hera`` library can is using the same search path as described above for ``evmone``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``hera`` library is using the same search path as described above for ``evmone`` (its variable is called ``$ETH_HERA``).
```

application ``soltest`` (or its wrapper ``scripts/soltest.sh``), as well as command line tests and
compilation tests.

The test system automatically tries to discover the location of the ``evmone`` and ``hera``
libraries starting from the current directory.

> If they are not found, tests that them are skipped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If they are not found, tests that require them are skipped.
```

By the way, I think this is no longer true after #11374 so we should change it. Now `soltest` requires `evmone` and you have to use `--no-semantic-tests` if you don't have it.

And I now remember why I don't get errors even though I don't have `hera`. Tests that use `hera` only run if you enable them with the `--ewasm` flag. Both of these flags should be mentioned here somewhere.

Author: I've been rewriting the whole part now.

> The tests that use ``evmone`` are ``libsolididty/semanticTests``, ``libsolidity/GasCosts``,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tests that use ``evmone`` are ``libsolidity/semanticTests``, ``libsolidity/GasCosts``,
```

``libsolidity/SolidityEndToEndTest``, part of the soltest suite.

> ``hera`` is used for running the EWasm tests.

Reviewer: I think we eventually settled on capitalizing it `Ewasm` (#7932).
```suggestion
``hera`` is used for running the Ewasm tests.
```
